---
layout: post
title:  "The Aunts"
author: anna
categories: [ background ]
image: assets/images/aunts.jpg
featured: false
hidden: false
---

When I was little, one of my favorite places to visit was my great-aunt Barbara's house. Her two-story white house in southwestern Connecticut was bright and airy, filled with family heirlooms and souvenirs from her extensive travels--a museum of the rich life she had led. Over lunch, we would share news about homework assignments and field trips, discuss Democratic politics, and catch up on the latest family activities, but inevitably, the conversation would turn to "the aunts."

Babbie, Mary, Meg, Eve, Kate, and Agnes are my great-great aunts, my great-grandfather's six sisters. Growing up, I knew them as "the aunts" because that's what they were to Aunt Barbara, who was the ultimate authority on them. She told us about how Aunt Eve went to teach the children of mountaineers in Kentucky. We heard about Aunt Kate's cabin on the Potomac River, which boasted an outhouse and no electricity, and how Aunt Mary, when asked why she had never married, said, "What, me marry a mere man?" We were told many times about fiery Aunt Agnes, who wore red tights and swam in swimming holes well into her 70s, and Aunt Meg, who walked in a suffragette's march, despite her father's remark, "There's a damn fool in every family." These stories were told over and over, sometimes eliciting new variations and details, but always powerful reminders of the women who had so inspired my great-aunt.

My senior year of high school, I decided to pursue an independent study project that would allow me to dig deeper into my family history while cultivating my interest in creative writing. I planned to collect fragments of family stories to serve as the basis for my own short stories fictionalizing these events. I put out a call to my family members for their memories of any kind, about anyone. Unsurprisingly, my great-aunt Barbara sent me stories about the aunts. But the stories were different this time--they were more concrete, with details I hadn't heard before. Aunt Barbara and her cousin Alice (Agnes's daughter) had pooled their collective memory to record what they remembered about the aunts, scanned photographs and documents, and sent me a file of information. I pored over Aunt Meg's "Memorandum of Public Health Training and Experience," an article about Aunt Agnes starting a children's gardening program in an abandoned lot in Wyomissing, Pennsylvania, and an annotated photograph of the entire Newman family. At a time when women were expected to marry and have families, I realized, the aunts were independent and daring. They had careers. They traveled. They devoted themselves to progressive causes. The mythical aunts were taking shape in my mind as real people who had lived real lives at the beginning of the 20th century.

In the years since then, I have continued to pursue my interest in family history, researching my ancestors and collecting more stories about each branch of my family. But, inevitably, my research always took me back to these six women.

The mythology of the aunts is deeply rooted in history and culture, in a sense of nostalgia, and in the collective memory of one family. Through this project, "The Newman Women," I plan to explore what these family stories can tell me about the aunts, about my family, and about myself. I want to see the aunts not as characters in stories, but as real people, shaped by the society in which they lived. I want to uncover how our family stories reflect or refract reality. And most of all, I want to understand the many reasons why we tell the stories we do--and leave some stories untold.

In each post on this blog, I plan to share a different story about the aunts, as passed down to me, or uncovered in my research. These stories may not necessarily be in chronological order, so I've posted some [biographical details about each aunt]({{site.baseurl}}/the-newmans), for future reference. (Not too many details, of course, as I think the best stories are revealed over time.) I also plan to use this site as a platform for experimenting with emerging tools in the digital humanities that will provide different approaches to looking on the aunts' lives and on my own. At the end of this project--if there will ever really be "an end"--I may not have answers to all of my many questions, but at least I will have told some good stories.