---
layout: post
title:  "Meg and the Pure Americans"
author: anna
categories: [ Meg ]
image: assets/images/immigrants.jpg
---
When I first started researching the years that [Meg]({{site.baseurl}}/meg) spent in rural western Maryland in the early 1920s, I knew next to nothing--only the short description written on her resume: "Part time worker, Frederick County, Md. School Health Inspection. Survey of farm tenancy for U. S. Dept. of Agriculture. Co-worker, Beulah Weldon Burhoe. Volunteer and experimental services. Expenses only."

I was searching Meg's name in historical newspapers when I came across a letter Beulah Weldon had written to her Barnard alumni magazine describing the "model farmstead" that she and Meg had started in Friends Creek, and this led me to more articles detailing their work at their settlement house, including a nearly full-page 1922 *Baltimore Sun* article called "Maryland Has Forgotten Colonies of Anglo Saxons." This article provided the most detailed accounting that I had seen thus far in my research, describing the history of the settlement and Meg and Beulah's activities on Friends Creek--much of which I recounted in a [previous post]({{site.baseurl}}/meg/2017/04/04/meg-pure-americans).

As I was reading this article, one line struck me as soon as I read it: "The Daughters of the American Revolution, who are greatly desirous of fostering patriotism and pure Americanism have contributed largely." "Pure Americanism"? What did that mean?

I read on and found the answer, in the words of my own great-great aunt.

“‘My principal motive in leaving New York and coming here was to help the country children, the native Americana, to get a better share of what is due them,’ says Miss Newman. ‘In New York there are fine schools, which are almost swamped by the children of recent immigrants, eager to learn, but remote regions such as this are permitting the children, many of whom are direct descendants of Revolutionary war heroes, to grow up in ignorance.'"

In her comments, Meg voices anti-immigrant sentiments that were common in the early 1920s, and that led to laws restricting immigration, which placed quotas on the number of immigrants who could enter the U.S. from various countries. The laws favored Anglo-Saxon immigrants over those from Southern and Eastern Europe and Asia, in part to establish a specific American identity represented by "native-born" Americans.

Meg explained how her experience working with immigrants led her to want to help those who were "native-born." Children in the cities, she thought, had opportunities to hear music, buy prepared food and ready-made dresses, and go to art galleries, whereas in rural areas "the only music, if any, will be a fiddle playing ‘Sourwood Mountain,’ [and] the children have no music lessons. The girls will have to cook all their lives, but there is no one to show them the value of proper preparation of food. They will always have to make their own clothes, but there are no sewing lessons. The boys are taught no trades, and if they do not get disgusted and move away there is no hope for them to do anything else but day labor, with little profitable work at that."

Meg also expressed contempt for some immigrants she knew who "had no spark of attachment whatever for this country and were simply using it for what they could get out of it, notwithstanding all that was being done for them." Thinking of the children in rural areas, Meg said, she became "heartsick" and "determined to cast my lot with them and do what I could to remedy the injustice.”

Reading these words was very upsetting to me. Meg is certainly expressing ideas that were shared by many at that time, including some settlement workers, who despite serving immigrants could not overcome their own prejudices. But where was the liberal, enlightened aunt I had heard about for so many years? Of all the aunts, I think of Meg as the most progressive. She marched for women's suffrage, and after women got the vote, became an ardent Democrat who would get into fights with my much more conservative great-grandfather. I once heard a story that she took in an unwed pregnant woman and helped her get on her feet. She devoted her life to nursing others. When I first discovered that she had started her own rural settlement house, I had envisioned her as an idealistic, self-sacrificing revolutionary, but now that image has been complicated.

Especially since I am descended from the very same people Meg considered to be taking what was not rightfully theirs, and not "pure Americans," solely because of where they came from. My maternal great-grandparents immigrated from southern Italy and Sicily to the United States in the early 1900s, settling in New Haven, Connecticut. They worked in factories, learned English, and assimilated into American society. I have often felt a tension in my heritage; reading Meg's words, I am more aware than ever of the distance that existed between my great-grandfather Samuel Newman, the president of a tool company in Waynesboro, Pennsylvania, and my great-grandfather Erasmo Brancato, a barber in New Haven, Connecticut.

We all make choices in our lives, and even when making the choice of devoting your life to service, you must make a choice of who you will serve. Which cause is the most worthy? Who needs your help the most? Meg saw a need in rural Maryland, and during the five years she served there, she undoubtedly did a great deal of good. When Meg first arrived at Friends Creek, only 12.5% of the children were at a normal weight; three years later, that number was at 80%. She organized visits from doctors at the school and transportation to the local hospital and to dentists for children who needed it. She and Beulah also expanded their settlement family, taking in local children who needed their help. Are these achievements tarnished in some way by the reasons Meg pursued them?

I struggle with how to reconcile Meg's good works with her prejudiced views. I admire her for her dedication to the people of Friends Creek, and for her courage in living an unconventional life that was different from the standard formula set for women. But I am also disappointed in her inability to surpass the dominant thinking of her age. Ultimately, I am understanding that yes, in many ways, Meg was a woman who was *ahead* of her time, but she was also very much *of* her time.

*Image: ["Immigrants"](https://calisphere.org/item/ark:/13030/ft5r29p0d6/) by Johan Hagemeyer. From the Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.*