---
layout: post
title:  "Who Was Alan Gilmour?"
author: anna
categories: [ Eve ]
image: assets/images/field.png
---
One of the biggest mysteries I have uncovered in my research lies in a 1925 passenger list. On January 7, 1925, a ship called the S.S. Venezuela sailed from Corinto, Nicaragua, on its way to Los Angeles, California. On board appeared to be [Eve]({{site.baseurl}}/eve)'s husband, Alan Gilmour. All of the details matched up, I noted: Family name: Gilmour. Given name: Alan P. Age: 54. Sex: M. Married or single: M[arried]. Date and place of birth: July 1st, 1870 - Henderson, Ky. But the next column held something surprising: a handwritten note that said: "Died in transit (suicide)."

I reread the note several times. Could I have misread the handwriting? Was this the correct person? I checked the personal details, then verified the date of his death--January 14, 1925--which matched with this record.

I had never heard the unusual circumstances of Eve's husband's death--in fact I had heard very little about her husband at all. Alan Gilmour was only a minor character in my story of Aunt Eve's life, noteworthy only for their [Lincoln-inspired meeting at the Pine Mountain Settlement School]({{site.baseurl}}/eve/2016/10/10/eve-last-year-kentucky). Their brief eight years of marriage were one of the least remarkable things that could be listed in Eve's biography--which also includes a degree from Columbia, a lengthy career in social work, and a stint in North Africa with the Red Cross during World War II.

And while my feminist soul cringes at the idea of defining women by the men in their lives, I do believe that the partners we choose to spend our days with are a reflection of our values and goals, even if for just a period in our lives. I decided to find out as much as I could about Alan Gilmour, in the hopes that understanding Eve's choice of a life partner would tell me even more about her.

<p><iframe src="https://cdn.knightlab.com/libs/timeline3/latest/embed/index.html?source=1BCZUdgxVMlKjiZIhZ4cU1tfFBigph-gE6WuJzyDqwAE&amp;font=Default&amp;lang=en&amp;initial_zoom=2&amp;height=650" width="100%" height="650" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen"></iframe></p>

Unlike Eve, Alan was born into a wealthy, aristocratic family; his father, Allan Gilmour, was a Scottish tobacco merchant, and his mother, Virginia Pegram, a Kentucky native whose mother was from the French West Indies. Although Alan was born in Kentucky, most of his childhood appears to have been spent in the seaside resort town of Helensburgh, Scotland, before he returned to the U.S. to study law. His privileged background was very different from what Eve experienced as a child; her father Jacob was a miller who was constantly moving the family from place to place and also, according to family stories, even left his wife and children behind in Pennsylvania to seek his fortune out west.

The constant impulse to seek out the next best thing is something Alan shared with his father-in-law. Although he mainly worked as a lawyer in Lexington, over the course of fifteen years, he moved four times--from Lexington to Alaska, to Detroit, back to Lexington, and finally to Los Angeles, California. He also dabbled in various careers, including automobile sales, local government, citrus farming, and real estate. I wonder how Eve viewed Alan's inability to settle in one place--she certainly did not make a habit of doing so during her life, either. Later, as a social worker, she traveled around the country; her resume includes stints as a probation officer in New Mexico; with the Works Progress Administration in Oklahoma and Mississippi; as executive director of the Volunteer Placement Bureau in Pasadena, California; and as a social worker for city relief in Chicago. Perhaps their shared desire to seek out new opportunities and experiences was part of what drew them together.

Eve and her husband also shared a fearlessness and singlemindedness of purpose--think of a young Eve [marching into congressmen's offices in Washington, D.C.]({{site.baseurl}}/eve/2016/09/06/eve-pine-mt), to rally support for the Pine Mountain Settlement School. As a young man, Alan showed his daring and impetuous nature, when, on Christmas night 1897, he ran off to offer his legal services to Cubans fighting the Cuban War of Independence (later the Spanish American War). The *Detroit Free Press* reported that Alan left his boarding house, "stating that he should not return and, after a hasty visit to his cousin, W. P. Hamilton, of 56 Davenport street, left for the east." In subsequent letters to his cousin and the law firm where he was employed, Alan announced his intention "to offer his personal services to the Cuban patriots. Mr. Gilmour was a member of the Naval Reserves," the newspaper report recounted, "and was known as plucky and daring." (“For Cuba Libre.” *The Detroit Free Press*, 1 January 1897, p. 10)

<p><iframe frameborder="0" scrolling="no" style="border:0px" src="https://books.google.com/books?id=rIdz2V9UB10C&dq=alan%20pegram%20gilmour%20Year%20Book%20of%20the%20Society%2C%20Sons%20of%20the%20Revolution&pg=PT5&output=embed" width="500" height="500"></iframe></p>

*Portrait of Alan P. Gilmour from the Year Book of the Society, Sons of the Revolution, in the Commonwealth of Kentucky, 1894-1913, and Catalogue of Military Land Warrants Granted by the Commonwealth of Virginia to Soldiers and Sailors of the Revolution, edited by Samuel M. Wilson, Society, Sons of the Revolution, 1913.*

Throughout his life, Alan was not afraid to speak out or offend others, as documented in his many letters to the editor published in newspapers and periodicals from around the country. He called out the *Kentucky Evening Gazette* for what he saw as their attempt to "make political capital" out of election day violence, praised the *Washington Post* for its anti-British stance in 1915, opposed Woodrow Wilson and the League of Nations, and, in a memorable letter from 1901, came out against the United States' support of the British during the Second Boer War. “It makes an American blush," Alan wrote, "to think how his country is daily assisting the British in crushing out two little republics, battling for their independence, as we did over 100 years ago.” He went on to say that in 1900, he met the then-president of South Africa, Paul Kruger, in Holland, as well as the assistant secretary of state for foreign affairs of the Transvaal republic, who told him that the British army in South Africa would have been helpless without American supplies of fresh horses and mules. He urged the Detroit Transvaal League to start a movement or petition to stop the shipment of horses from the U.S., saying, “Surely the few paltry millions we make by the sale of such horses can not compensate us for the loss of our self-respect and national honor? And, as a nation, can we persist in such work--aiding and abetting farm burning, banishment, concentration camps and all--and retain our honor and self-respect? I think not.” (“From Free Press Readers.” *Detroit Free Press*, 24 December 1901, p. 4.)

Alan's penchant for writing also found a more literary mode of expression--poetry. Periodicals and newspapers from the early 1900s are peppered with his poems, and he was one of the original stockholders in the *Kentucky Magazine*, a publication, as you may guess, focused on Kentucky. Although mostly unremarkable, his poetry has patriotic, nationalistic themes, focusing on elements of Kentucky history, such as ["The Naming of Lexington,"](https://books.google.com/books?id=m8YWAAAAYAAJ&dq=%22alan%20p%20gilmour%22&pg=PA360#v=onepage&q=%22alan%20p%20gilmour%22&f=false) or his adopted home state of California, as in "Van Nuys, California." Alan also expressed his political opinions through poetry; in 1919, his poem "Good Enough for Me" declared his opposition to what he termed the "hypocritical League of (Imperialistic) Nations." "The good old Declaration / Is good enough for me," he stated. As is "the good old Constitution ... fashioned / As a guard for Liberty" and "the good old Monroe Doctrine." (Gilmour, Alan Pegram. [“Good Enough.”](https://books.google.com/books?id=UloxAQAAMAAJ&dq=%22alan%20pegram%20gilmour%22&pg=RA1-PA57#v=onepage&q=%22alan%20pegram%20gilmour%22&f=false) *Harvey’s Weekly*, 22 November 1919, p. 16.)

<p><iframe style="border: 0px;" src="https://books.google.com/books?id=UloxAQAAMAAJ&amp;dq=%22alan%20pegram%20gilmour%22&amp;pg=RA1-PA74&amp;output=embed" scrolling="no" width="700" height="1000" frameborder="0"></iframe></p>

One of Alan's more original creations came when he delivered a legal motion in the form of a poem. The poem talked about being excused from his wanderings from Lexington (he had just been in Alaska and Detroit for a number of years) and wanting to resume his work in the Lexington courts. "So with your kind permission, all / Once more I'll try my fate, / In these legal halls of fair renown / Of Lexington, the Great!" According to Louisville's *Courier-Journal*, "Judge Kerr smilingly remarked that the motion was granted." (“Legal Motion in Rhyme.” *The Courier-Journal* [Louisville, KY], 1 December 1912, p. 7.)

This picture of Alan as a spirited, opinionated, aspiring creative partner for Eve is ultimately clouded by the mystery that surrounds his death.

There are hints that Alan was developing an interest in Latin America in the years before his death. In 1921, he traveled to Mexico on a trip sponsored by the Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce, as part of a group that included "some of the most prominent business men of southern California, and every industry of that district is represented in the party." ("Los Angeles Men Here Tomorrow on Mexico Trip." *Arizona Republic*, 7 February 1921, p. 12.) In 1923, he hosted two men with ties to Latin America, one the former head of the Latin American Trade Bureau who was developing a steamship line between Los Angeles and the west coast of Mexico, and the other the consul in Los Angeles representing Colombia. (“Noted Men Visitors at Gilmour Home.” *The Van Nuys News* [Van Nuys, CA], 28 August 1923, p. 3.) These connections, when combined with Alan's demonstrated interest in seeking out new opportunities, might suggest that he was pursuing economic interests in Latin America.

Alan's writings also show a lifelong engagement with the United States' international activities, expressing his criticism of U.S. involvement in the Second Boer War and President Woodrow Wilson's League of Nations. Could his political opinions on the U.S.'s interventions in Latin America have led him to Nicaragua in 1925? The United States had maintained a military presence in Nicaragua, dating from 1912, but in the same month that Alan sailed from the country, the U.S. announced that it would end its 13-year military presence there. Alan's keen interest in foreign affairs may explain in part what led him to Nicaragua, but the mystery of his fatal voyage home remains and will likely never be fully resolved.

After Alan's death, Eve found herself, at the age of 37, a widow. When she married Alan, Eve was a spirited, independent young woman, who had been seeking her own path in the world. With Alan, she had embarked on a life that was undoubtedly exciting, but at times, precarious and unstable. Yet neither this marriage, nor the manner of how it ended, defined her life. The same year that she was widowed, Eve moved back across the country to attend the New York School of Social Work, starting a new life defined in large part by her pioneering career.