---
layout: post
title:  "Meg and Experimental Services"
author: anna
categories: [ Meg ]
image: assets/images/farmfield.jpg
---
On September 2, 1919, a rural schoolhouse opened its doors. The Friends' Creek School, way up in the mountains of Western Maryland, had been closed for two years--teachers were hard to come by, especially for remote spots such as Friends' Creek--but now it was the site of an experiment in settlement living, undertaken by two enterprising women.

Beulah Weldon, a twenty-six-year-old only a few years out of Barnard College, stood at the front of the class. With her was [Meg]({{site.baseurl}}/meg), who would use her nursing skills to improve the health and wellbeing of Beulah's students, as well as that of the local community. Beulah and Meg's venture was part of the settlement house movement; fueled mainly by young people seeking an outlet for putting into practice their progressive ideals, settlement houses and schools were established in many urban neighborhoods and isolated rural communities in the early 1900s. (Meg's sister [Eve]({{site.baseurl}}/eve) was [active in rural settlements in Kentucky]({{site.baseurl}}/eve/2016/06/22/eve-ky-mts).) These reform institutions provided education, health care, and other social services to their communities, grounding themselves in the idea that to understand and help others, one had to "settle" among them.

Before their move to the western Maryland mountains, Meg and Beulah had been active in settlement work in a much different community--New York City. They had met at the Henry Street Settlement House, a well-known institution founded by Lillian Wald in 1893. After she graduated from Barnard College in 1915, Beulah started working for the Committee for Vocational Schools at Henry Street. Meg started at Henry Street a few years before, in 1912, working as a staff nurse with Henry Street's Visiting Nurse Service before becoming nurse-in-charge at the settlement's convalescent and vacation homes in Montclair, New Jersey, and Grand View, New York. In 1919, the two decided to leave Henry Street and take their settlement mission to tiny, isolated Friends' Creek, Maryland.

The Frederick (Maryland) *Daily News* described Meg and Beulah's "unique living arrangements," which the newspaper described as "like stories one reads of isolated western communities in pioneer days":

>A small shack has been fitted up, as convenient to the school house as possible, and here Miss Weldon and Miss Newman will make their home. "Convenient to the school house" is a misleading phrase, however, as the shack is at least 3 or 4 miles distant, and teacher and nurse will have to drive to school every day.

(“School Open First Time in Two Years.” *The Daily News* (Frederick, Maryland), 27 August 1919, p. 4.) The house came with 53 acres of land, as well as a pig pen, and over the next few years, they continued to make improvements, acquiring cows, a horse, chickens, and a flock of sheep, and adding a screened-in porch (a rarity in that area, the newspaper account claimed).

In the vein of most rural settlement houses, Beulah and Meg set out to provide education, health care, and general services to the local community. After they had been at Friends' Creek for a year, Beulah wrote a letter to her alumni journal, *The Barnard Bulletin*, sharing the progress that they had made: "I have taught the district school during the winter and Miss Newman has given health lessons, taught sewing, knitting and handwork, acted as school attendance officer and school nurse, and has made nursing visits when necessary," Beulah wrote. "We succeeded in getting an appropriation from the Frederick County School Board to cover part of her salary. We have opened our home, which is a dilapidated little mountain house, as a recreation room. We are aiming to have a model farmstead and to influence our neighborhood through informal contacts made in our daily living." (“Letters.” *The Barnard Bulletin*, 30 April 1920, p. 1.)

The idea Beulah expressed of influencing their local community through "informal contacts made in our daily living" gets at the heart of the settlement movement and reflects a sentiment expressed by settlement pioneer Jane Addams, the founder of Chicago's Hull House. Settlement residents, Addams wrote in her essay "The Subjective Necessity for Social Settlements," "must be content to live quietly side by side with their neighbors until they grow into a sense of relationship and mutual interests."

Meg and Beulah appear to have cultivated those relationships Addams noted in her essay. The "Friends' Creek settlement," as it was known, attracted support from the State Federation of Women's Clubs, Rotary Club, and Daughters of the American Revolution. I also found mention of Beulah making several speeches on behalf of their work, bringing to mind the advocacy and fundraising that Eve did for the Hindman and Pine Mountain Settlement Schools, and the question, did Meg ever call upon her sister for support with her own settlement?

One sister, at least, but not the one you'd expect. According to the *Baltimore Sun*, in the summer of 1922, Meg's sister Agnes, and her husband, Milton Lightwood, planned to join the Friends' Creek settlement. Milton was going to be spending the summer "trying to instill into the natives a knowledge of better methods of farming. Part of his program is the establishment of a model hennery at the settlement. Even if the Misses Weldon and Newman had the technical training and the physical strength, they could do no good in agricultural instruction, for the men of the community would scorn to learn such things from a woman.” (“Maryland Has Forgotten Colonies of Anglo Saxons.”)

The model hennery and agricultural instruction are examples of the kind of experimentation that happened at Friends' Creek, although the entire settlement was truly an experiment--Meg even described these years of work experience on her resume as "experimental services." But experimentation was at the heart of the settlement movement. Jane Addams described the settlement as "an experimental effort to aid in the solution of the social and industrial problems which are engendered by the modern conditions of life in a great city." The settlement, she said, must be flexible, quick to adapt, and ready to "change its methods as its environment may demand. It must be open to conviction, and have a deep and abiding sense of tolerance. It must be hospitable and ready for experiment."

Reading about the work that Meg and Beulah achieved at Friends' Creek, as well as the idea of a settlement as a sort of "incubator" for new ideas, I am struck by the ingenuity and resiliency displayed by settlement workers, who were constantly observing new problems and trying out new ways to fix them. To take on this work, to move to an isolated community and live in a small, dilapidated shack, to dedicate their lives to improving the lives of others, required strength of purpose on the part of Meg and Beulah.

So what was this purpose? Why did they choose to devote themselves to "experimental services"?

The answer is complicated, and in many ways, a little painful for me. Meg and Beulah were certainly moved by the real need in the rural Maryland community, but their move to Maryland was also a rejection of the community that they were serving in New York City. The "deep and abiding sense of tolerance" Jane Addams valued in settlements? They didn't have that. When this story continues, I'll share what led Meg and Beulah to leave Henry Street, and how my perception of Meg, her life and work, is changing.

*Image: ["United States, view of farm field in Flintstone, Maryland"](http://collections.lib.uwm.edu/cdm/ref/collection/agsnorth/id/12346) by Robert S. Platt. From the American Geographical Society Library, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries.*